---
layout: post
title: Ruby had a little lambda
---

In my opinion, one of the coolest features of Ruby is its implementation of
anonymous functions. Aptly named 'lambdas', it seems clear that these are derived
directly from the calculus after which they are named: the lambda-calculus.
I want to demonstrate the power of lambdas in Ruby by showing a translation of
terms in the lambda-calculus into Ruby lambda syntax. Since the lambda-calculus
is a vast field, this is by no means a formal proof of the soundness of my
translation. I simply wish to illustrate the beginnings of such a proof and
possibly make some interesting inferences at the conclusion.

Since everything in Ruby has a type(i.e. integer, string, etc...), I will be
informally following the rules of a [ simply-typed lambda-calculus ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simply_typed_lambda_calculus).

The idea behind the lambda-calculus is that the set of lambda-terms, *M*,
can be constructed from variables *x,y,...* by the following grammar:
<blockquote>
  <p>
    <em>M</em> ::= c | <em>x</em> | ( &#955;<em>x M</em> ) | ( <em>M N</em> )
  </p>
</blockquote>
Where c is a constant, *x* is a variable, and the last two terms are &#955;-abstraction and
&#955;-application respectively.

Lambda-terms are reduced by just one rule:
<blockquote>
  <p>
    (( &#955;<em>x M ) N </em>) -> {<em>N/x</em>} M
  </p>
</blockquote>
Which means that *N* is substituted for *x* at every occurrence of *x* in *M*.

<strong>
  Now for the translation:
</strong>

1. c => c
2. x => x
3. &#955;*x M* => lambda { |x| M }
4. (* M N *) => lambda { |x| M }.call(N)

In (3) and (4) it is important to note that *x* must not occur freely in *M* or *N*.

Example: Consider the lambda-term ( &#955;<em>x x*2</em> )(( &#955;<em>z z^2</em> )3 )<br />
(I'm glossing over the notion of type by assuming that everything is an integer)

Using the reduction rule of the lambda-calculus, we see the following steps:

1. ( &#955;<em>x x*2</em> )(( &#955;<em>z z^2</em> )3 )
2. ( &#955;<em>z z^2</em> )3 )*2
3. 3^2 *2
4. 18

So if our translation is correct, the output should be the integer 18. The term above is
translated into Ruby like so:


    lambda { |x| x*2 }.call(lambda { |z| z**2 }.call(3))


Run this in a Ruby interpreter and it does indeed give 18.

<strong> Conclusions </strong>

While I haven't shown that my translation is sound, I hope that I *have* given a notion
of the equivalence between the lambda-calculus and Ruby lambdas. Interestingly, the
simply-typed lambda-calculus is not Turing-complete, but this is because it is certain
that any program written in it will come to a halt at some point. Therefore, a sound
translation of Ruby lambdas into a simply-typed lambda-calculus will guarantee that a
program cannot run forever. Food for thought.
